# Genomic molecular characterization for viral strains using informatics tools# CGS_popgen_training_module
CGS, USAMRIID Viral Population Genomics Training Module

# Objective:  
The training module will provide the complete bioinformatics workflow for analyzing genomics data using open source tools. The training module uses sequence reads generated using genomics tools such as genomic DNA or RNA sequencing using next generation sequencing technology with objective of characterization of viral strains in outbreak setting. 
# Introduction:
Infectious diseases are the most common cause of major fatalities of human life. Ebola virus disease (EVD) is one of the deadliest disease and observed in several outbreaks occurred primarily on the African continent. EVD effects both non-human primates (NHPs) and humans. It is the infection caused by the group of Ebola virus of family Filoviridae. There mainly four viruses Ebola, Sudan, Taï Forest, and Bundibugyo viruses which causes deadly disease in people. Viruses tend to evolve very fast with DNA mutations in their smaller genomes. In epidemiological studies often in outbreak setting genomics tools are often used in studying the specific mutations in viral strains and sub-population that can potentially make these viruses more resistant to treatments. Early during the recent Ebola epidemic in West Africa, scientists speculated that the genetic diversity of the circulating Makona strain of virus (EBOV-Makona) would result in more severe disease and more transmissibility than prior strains, as there are mutations observed on the viral surface glycoprotein. The training module will use the data generated in-house for viral plasmid EBOV Makona virus strain (SL3864-8U) closest to GenBank match Zaire ebolavirus isolate Ebola virus/H.sapiens-wt/SLE/2014/Makona-G3677.2, complete genome (KM034557.1). We will be using this as a reference genome to study the reported mutations in specific plasmids (414 (SL3864), 424 (NP UTR), 440 (GP V82A). In this module we will use open source bioinformatics tool to specific mutation in three other plasmids from the recovered viral isolates. 
